ON THE EINSTEIN PODOLSKY ROSEN PARADOX*
J. S. BELLt
Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 
{Received 4 November 1964)
I. Introduction
THE paradox of Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen [1] was advanced as an argument that quantum mechanics 
could not be a complete theory but should be supplemented by additional variables. These additional vari-
ables were to restore to the theory causality and locality [2]. In this note that idea will be formulated 
mathematically and shown to be incompatible with the statistical predictions of quantum mechanics. It is 
the requirement of locality, or more precisely that the result of a measurement on one system be unaffected 
by operations on a distant system with which it has interacted in the past, that creates the essential dif-
ficulty. There have been attempts [3] to show that even without such a separability or locality require-
ment no “ hidden variable”  interpretation of quantum mechanics is possible. These attempts have been 
examined elsewhere [4] and found wanting. Moreover, a hidden variable interpretation of elementary quan-
tum theory [5] has been explicitly constructed. That particular interpretation has indeed a grossly non-
local structure. This is characteristic, according to the result to be proved here, of any such theory which 
reproduces exactly the quantum mechanical predictions.
II. Formulation
With the example advocated by Bohm and Aharonov [6], the EPR argument is the following. Consider 
a pair of spin one-half particles formed somehow in the singlet spin state and moving freely in opposite 
directions. Measurements can be made, say by Stern-Gerlach magnets, on selected components of the 
spins o x and o 2 • If measurement of the component o x *3, where 3 is some unit vector, yields the value 
+ 1 then, according to quantum mechanics, measurement of o 2 ° 3 must yield the value -1 and vice versa. 
Now we make the hypothesis [2], and it seems one at least worth considering, that if the two measure-
ments are made at places remote from one another the orientation of one magnet does not influence the 
result obtained with the other. Since we can predict in advance the result of measuring any chosen compo-
nent of o 2 , by previously measuring the same component of o 1, it follows that the result of any such 
measurement must actually be predetermined. Since the initial quantum mechanical wave function does not 
determine the result of an individual measurement, this predetermination implies the possibility of a more 
complete specification of the state.
Let this more complete specification be effected by means of parameters A. It is a matter of indiffer-
ence in the following whether A denotes a single variable or a set, or even a set of functions, and whether 
the variables are discrete or continuous. However, we write as if A were a single continuous parameter. 
The result A of measuring o 1 *3 is then determined by3 and*A, and the result B of measuring o 2*% in the 
same instance is determined by t  and A, and
♦Work supported in part by the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission 
tOn leave of absence from SLAC and CERN
Physics Vol. 1, No. 3, pp. 195—200, 1964 
Physics Publishing Co. 
Printed in the United States
195

196 
J. S. BELL 
Vol. 1, No. 3
(1)
The vital assumption [2] is that the result B for particle 2 does not depend on the setting a, of the magnet 
for particle 1, nor A on t.
If p(A) is the probability distribution of A then the expectation value of the product of the two com- 
ponents o 1 . a and o 2% b is
(2)
This should equal the quantum mechanical expectation value, which for the singlet state is
(3)
But it will be shown that this is not possible.
Some might prefer a formulation in which the hidden variables fall into two sets, with A dependent on 
one and B on the other; this possibility is contained in the above, since A stands for any number of vari-
ables and the dependences thereon of A and B are unrestricted. In a complete physical theory of the 
type envisaged by Einstein, the hidden variables would have dynamical significance and laws of motion; 
our A can then be thought of as initial values of these variables at some suitable instant.
III. Illustration
The proof of the main result is quite simple. Before giving it, however, a number of illustrations may 
serve to put it in perspective.
Firstly, there is no difficulty in giving a hidden variable account of spin measurements on a single 
particle^ Suppose we have a spin half particle in a pure spin state with polarization denoted by a unit 
vector p. Let the hidden variable be (for example) a unit vector X with uniform probability distribution 
over the hemisphere A • p > 0. Specify that the result of measurement of a component a • a is
(4)
where a is a unit vector depending on a and p in a way to be specified, and the sign function is +1 or 
-1  according to the sign of its argument. Actually this leaves the result undetermined when A • a' = Or 
but as the probability of this is zero we will not make special prescriptions for it. Averaging over A the 
expectation value is
(5)
where 6 is the angle between a and p. Suppose then that a1 is obtained from a by rotation towards p 
until
(6)
where 6 is the angle between a and p. Then we have the desired result
(7)
So in this simple case there is no difficulty in the view that the result of every measurement is determined 
by the value of an extra variable, and that the statistical features of quantum mechanics arise because the 
. value of this variable is unknown in individual instances.

Secondly, there is no difficulty in reproducing, in the form (2), the only features of (3) commonly used 
in verbal discussions of this problem:
Vol. 1, No. 3 
ON THE EINSTEIN PODOLSKY ROSEN PARADOX 
197
(8)
For example, let A now be unit vector A, with uniform probability distribution over all directions, and take
(9)
This gives
(10)
where Q is the angle between a and b, and (10) has the properties (8). For comparison, consider the re-
sult of a modified theory [6] in which the pure singlet state is replaced in the course of time by an iso-
tropic mixture of product states; this gives the correlation function
(ID
It is probably less easy, experimentally, to distinguish (10) from (3), than (11) from (3).
Unlike (3), the function (10) is not stationary at the minimum value - 1  (at 6 = 0). It will be seen 
that this is characteristic of functions of type (2).
Thirdly, and finally, there is no difficulty in reproducing the quantum mechanical correlation (3) if the 
results A and B in (2) are allowed to depend on 
and a respectively as well as on a and t. For ex-
ample, replace a in (9) by a#, obtained from a by rotation towards % until
where 6' is the angle between a* and %. However, for given values of the hidden variables, the results 
of measurements with one magnet now depend on the setting of the distant magnet, which is just what we 
would wish to avoid.
IV. Contradiction
The main result will now be proved. Because p is a normalized probability distribution,
(12)
and because of the properties (1), P in (2) cannot be less than -1 . It can reach - 1  at a = t  only if
(13)
except at a set of points A of zero probability. Assuming this, (2) can be rewritten
(14)

It follows that c is another unit vector
198 
J- S. BELL 
Vol. 1, No. 3
using (1), whence
The second term on the right is P(&, c), whence
(15)
Unless P is constant, the right hand side is in general of order | t - c  | for small | 2 - c  | . Thus P(2, c) 
cannot be stationary at the minimum value (-1  at t  = c) and cannot equal the quantum mechanical 
value (3).
Nor can the quantum mechanical correlation (3) be arbitrarily closely approximated by the form (2). 
The formal proof of this may be set out as follows. We would not worry about failure of the approximation 
at isolated points, so let us consider instead of (2) and (3) the functions
where the bar denotes independent averaging of P(a, V) and -a* • t* over vectors a# and t* within spec-
ified small angles of a and t . Suppose that for all a and t  the difference is bounded by e :
(16)
Then it will be shown that e cannot be made arbitrarily small. 
Suppose that for all a and b
(17)
Then from (16)
(18)
From (2)
(19)
where
(20)
From (18) and (19), with a = t ,
(21)
From (19)

Vol. 1, No. 3 
ON THE EINSTEIN PODOLSKY ROSEN PARADOX 
199
Using (20) then
Then using (19) and 21)
Finally, using (18),
or
(22)
Take for example a • c = 0, a • t  = t  • c = l/yJ2 
Then
Therefore, for small finite 8, e cannot be arbitrarily small.
Thus, the quantum mechanical expectation value cannot be represented, either accurately or arbitrar-
ily closely, in the form (2).
V. Generalization
The example considered above has the advantage that it requires little imagination to envisage the 
measurements involved actually being made. In a more formal way, assuming [7] that any Hermitian oper-
ator with a complete set of eigenstates is an “ observable” , the result is easily extended to other systems. 
If the two systems have state spaces of dimensionality greater than 2 we can always consider two dimen-
sional subspaces and define, in their direct product, operators o x and <j 2 formally analogous to those 
used above and which are zero for states outside the product subspace. Then for at least one quantum 
mechanical state, the “ singlet”  state in the combined subspaces, the statistical predictions of quantum 
mechanics are incompatible with separable predetermination.
VI. Conclusion
In a theory in which parameters are added to quantum mechanics to determine the results of individual 
measurements, without changing the statistical predictions, there must be a mechanism whereby the set-
ting of one measuring device can influence the reading of another instrument, however remote. Moreover, 
the signal involved must propagate instantaneously, so that such a theory could not be Lorentz invariant.
Of course, the situation is different if the quantum mechanical predictions are of limited validity. 
Conceivably they might apply only to experiments in which the settings of the instruments are made suffi-
ciently in advance to allow them to reach some mutual rapport by exchange of signals with velocity less 
than or equal to that of light. In that connection, experiments of the type proposed by Bohm and Aharonov 
[6], in which the settings are changed during the flight of the particles, are crucial.
I am indebted to Drs. M. Bander and J. K. Perring for very useful discussions of this problem. The 
first draft of the paper was written during a stay at Brandeis University; I am indebted to colleagues there 
and at the University of Wisconsin for their interest and hospitality.

References
1. A. EINSTEIN, N. ROSEN and B. PODOLSKY, Phys. Rev. 47, 777 (1935); see also N. BOHR, Ibid. 48, 
696 (1935), W. H. FURRY, Ibid. 49, 393 and 476 (1936), and D. R. INGLIS, Rev. Mod. Phys. 33, 1 
(1961).
2. “ But on one supposition we should, in my opinion, absolutely hold fast: the real factual situation of 
the system S2 is independent of what is done with the system Sx , which is spatially separated from 
the former/’ A. EINSTEIN in Albert Einstein, Philosopher Scientist, (Edited by P. A. SCHILP) p. 85, 
Library of Living Philosophers, Evanston, Illinois (1949).
3. J. VON NEUMANN, Mathematishe Grundlagen der Quanten-mechanik. Verlag Julius-Springer, Berlin 
(1932), [English translation: Princeton University Press (1955)]; J. M. JAUCH and C. PIRON, Helv. 
Phys. Acta 36, 827 (1963).
4. J. S. BELL, to be published.
5. D. BOHM, Phys. Rev. 85, 166 and 180 (1952).
6. D. BOHM and Y. AHARONOV, Phys. Rev. 108, 1070 (1957).
7. P. A. M. DIRAC, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics (3rd Ed.) p. 37. The Clarendon Press, Oxford 
(1947).
200 
J. S. BELL 
Vol. 1, No. 3

